A Blog Post

A full course meal is a dinner consisting of multiple dishes or courses. 
The most common example includes three courses: an appetizer, a light dinner, 
and a selection from the dessert menu.
t's possible to add more courses to a full course meal and include additional items. 
These meals are often extravagant events and celebrate a person or a special occasion.
Origin
The first version of a full course meal--one with three courses--originated in Spain in the 9th century. A Persian polymath named Ziryab insisted to the Emirati court that meals be served in segments.
What Is a Full Course Meal?
large full course meal dining table setting with featuring plates of food
full course dinner is a meal featuring multiple courses. The basic full course meal consists of three or four courses. They begin with precursors to a main dish, such as an amuse-bouche, followed by the main course(s), and conclude with sweets, coffee, and tea.

Full course meals frequently occur at someone’s home, a venue, or a restaurant. They take place in the afternoon or evening for a special occasion. In both upscale restaurants and casual eateries, guests can opt for a full course meal by ordering multiple dishes to come out at separate times. While a traditional full course meal may be more complex than quick service, it is still commonly enjoyed by groups of friends at celebratory events. The more ambitious tasting menu includes up to 20 courses and extends over a long period.
He wanted soup, followed by a main dish, and finishing with a dessert. 
The idea caught on and gradually became more popular throughout Spain and other parts of Europe and the Middle East.

Full Course Meal Overview
A full course meal or multi-course dinner is a meal of multiple courses, which are items served together. Each has a particular size and meaning that justifies its sequence.

Most restaurants offer a three-course meal with an appetizer, an entrée, and dessert. It's possible to add more courses, such as a fourth course that includes soup or hors-d'oeuvres before the appetizer.

Determining whether you're having a full course meal can help you calculate the amount of time your dinner will take. It will also give you an idea of how much it will cost. You might also allow time for yourself to get hungry before the meal.

What Is a Meal Course?
A meal course is a single or set of food items served at a specific point in a meal sequence for culinary and digestion reasons. Common courses are an appetizer, main course, and dessert. Some cultures a grains or pasta course, followed by a meat course, then a seafood course. An average meal consists of one or more meal courses.

How Many Courses Are in a Meal?
Many meals only contain one course. The most basic full course meal consists of 2 or 3 of the following courses: an appetizer, a main dish, and a dessert. However, meals can feature up to 12 or more courses.

The following is the typical sequence for full course meals in the United States:

The dinner starts with an appetizer or hors-d'oeuvre, a small serving that doesn't include red meat.
A variety of dishes might follow, usually something light or a fish.
Next is the main course, the largest and most important course of the meal.
The meal continues with a selection of cheese accompanied by wine. However, in the United Kingdom, the cheese course will follow dessert as the final course of the dinner.
Finally, diners choose a type of dessert to finish their meal. It can be either hot or cold and accompanied by an appropriate dessert wine.
Full Course Meal Table Setting
In this layout, diners can find the correct implement for the first course at the outer edge of the fancy arrangement.
A thirteen-course place setting includes numerous utensils, receptacles, and vessels.
 Near the plate on both sides, you'll find:
 
-a caviar spoon
-a cocktail fork
-an escargot fork
-a bouillon spoon
-a fish fork and knife
-a lobster pick
-a bone marrow spoon
-an entrée fork and knife
-a relevé fork and knife
-a saladé fork and knife
Above the plate, there's a bread knife and a plate with a personal butter dish. There's also a fishbone dish, sorbet spoon, cheese knife, nut pick, and a dessert fork and spoon.

On the right side of the plate, you'll find a salt cellar and spoon with pepper. Glassware includes a water goblet, champagne flute, white wine, red wine, dessert or sherry, and port glasses.

This layout is usual for dinners served à la carte, so the appropriate silverware is available for each course. For example, some diners may order thick, creamy soups while others order thin, clear soups. Each of these soups requires a specific spoon. It would be impractical to place a useless spoon on the table.


Full Course Meal Variations
You can adjust the number of courses in your meal to fit your occasion. Wedding receptions and wedding rehearsals usually include a three or four-course dinner. However, more formal dinners may include more courses that are very expensive.

A full course meal can consist of between 5 and 16 courses and has even included as many as 21. During these formal events, the plan and sequence complement each other gastronomically for the benefit and comfort of the diners.

There are courses spread out over a long evening for four or five hours. Many included in the most formal dinners offer different wine varietals, beer, or liquor. They adhere to the traditional planning of menus over the past few centuries.

Wine pairings are most common throughout formal dining experiences. Learn about the differences between the best wine to pair with salmon vs. the best wine to pair with turkey before developing a tasting menu. 

Here are different types of full course meals with the appropriate dishes listed:

A single-course meal includes only a main dish or entrée.

A two-course meal serves either a soup/salad followed by an entrée or a main course and finishes with a dessert item.

Three-course meals have an appetizer, an entrée, and dessert.

A four-course dinner includes a soup, salad, entrée, and dessert.

Five-course meals serve an appetizer, soup, entrée, dessert, and cheese.

A six-course meal offers hors-d'oeuvres, soup, fish, and an entrée, followed by salad, coffee, and dessert.

Eleven-Course Meal Example
The largest of the usual full course meals is the eleven-course meal, which only appears at formal and expensive dining affairs. Did you know that guests on the ill-fated Titanic enjoyed an eleven-course meal?

Here is an example of a classic French eleven-course meal including typical dishes for each course in parentheses:

First course- appetizer (green salad, smoked salmon)

Second course- soup (cream of tomato, minestrone)

Third course- fish (salmon, trout)

Fourth-course- entrée (steak tartare, chicken breast)

Fifth course- meat joint (roast leg of lamb-to work with a lamb wine pairing)

Sixth-course- sorbet (lemon sorbet, raspberry sorbet)

Seventh-course- roast (roast chicken, roast duck)

Eighth-course- vegetables (spinach, broccoli, asparagus)

Ninth-course- sweets (apple slices)

Tenth-course- savory (crab cakes, spring rolls)

Eleventh-course- nuts (walnuts, almonds)


